<!-- 
.. title: Interviews with FLOSS developers: Laura Arjona
.. slug: interviews-with-floss-developers-laura-arjona
.. date: 2015-03-20 21:35:36 UTC+02:00
.. tags: larjona, debian, floss
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

_One of fresh additions to Debian, that is showing Debian's commitment to
diversity in all fields is Laura Arjona Reina. A helpful hand on channels and
a great flux of FLOSS energy she brings with herself. Although applied for
non-packaging Debian Developer status, Laura does recognize that there are
still some technical aspects what must grasp on. Her dedication to FLOSS and
trying to solve some of its issues is astonishing, as this woman is doing a
lot of self-hosting and system administration. Yes, you read it right - she
does all of that and still applied for non-packaging Debian Developer. She is
perfect example how FLOSS enhances humans in many ways. Hello Laura._

<!-- TEASER_END -->

![Picture of Laura](../images/larjona.png)

**Who are you?**

I am [Laura Arjona](https://wiki.debian.org/LauraArjona), I work as IT
assistant at Technic University of Madrid, I am married and I have a son, and
I use and promote free (libre) software both at job and at home and with
friends. I have a nice time contributing in Debian and other FLOSS projects
but I always want to do more than what I manage to actually do (I hope I can
improve that, as time goes by... and maybe when I get retired I am the
SuperLArjona that you wrote about!).

**What parts of FLOSS community are you engaged?**

I use Debian, and CyanogenMod + [F-Droid](https://f-droid.org) in my phone. I
coordinate the translation of the Debian website into Spanish, help with FSFE
website translation too, and translate some other free software ([GNU
MediaGoblin](http://mediagoblin.org), F-Droid, Android apps that I use, web
services that we use at work...). I use and promote some free social networks:
pump.io, GNU Social, and XMPP. My work/friends environment is mostly
Windows/Android so I try to find/promote libre software replacements or
interesting applications for them. I give free FLOSS stickers to everybody
showing interest for libre software, and a nice Debian sticker if they finally
install it in their computers.

**Setup of your main machine?**

My machine is a humble Compaq Mini 110C laptop (32bits, Atom N270@1.60GHz, 1GB
RAM) and I have Debian Jessie (future-stable ATM) with xfce on it. I'm not
tied to particular tools, for example I use Mousepad for editing here in my
xfce, Kate in my desktop at work, nano in the server. The only "tuning" that I
always do is to set a dark background for terminals and text editors, but I
don't even switch to a desktop dark theme... (BTW I love Jessie's theme,
"Lines"!). I know there are awesome pieces of software out there (hey emacs-
org-mode!), but I just don't have fun having to learn them by myself (no LUG
near, I'm afraid...).

**Some memorable moments from Debian conferences?**

I've only been at [Barcelona MiniDebConf Women
2014](http://bcn2014.mini.debconf.org/) and it was great. It was memorable
that I promoted the keysigning for that MiniDebConf, and came home with lots
of signatures and papers to verify and sign... and then I was not remembering
my GPG main key passphrase! so I hid under my desk for two months, and then,
decided to start again (created a new key and tried to meet some Debian people
in Madrid...). So I guess I should go to some (Mini)DebConf again.

**You are currently involved in process of becoming non-packaging Debian Developer - what made you take that step?**

I began translating in 2011, and since then, I enjoyed contributing in Debian
(women, l10n-es, website, publicity). I'm quite regular with the translation
work, and applying for DD is a plan to 'force' myself to find chunks of time
to contribute more in the other areas too. I also believe that applying I may
help other people to also apply or get more involved or become more visible.
So here I am.

**Although you applied for non-packaging Debian Developer you recognize that there is still a technical learning curve in Debian even for that - what are the technical aspects a non-Developer should grasp?**

Well, I suppose it depends on the area you are contributing. In Publicity you
find repositories in git (bits.debian.org), and subversion (Debian Project
News). The website uses CVS (www.debian.org)... So you need the basics of 3
different version control systems to commit your changes (or send them to the
mailing list and wait somebody to commit them). We use a mail robot to
coordinate the translation work, so you need to write the subject with a
certain format, and some people complains when somebody send mail in HTML
(plain text is preferred). There are some other tools such as IRC and GPG that
I began using just for contributing to Debian. Once that you learn them a bit
and you learn how Debian works, you understand they are the great tools and
you get in love (hey meetbot and KGB! hey i18n.debian.org!), but I wonder how
people with no technical background, or even Computer Engineering students
nowadays, accostumed to instant messaging in the mobile, fancy web interfaces
and so on, look at these tools and just don't even try.

**How do you see future of Debian development?**

I don't know, Debian is huge... Some areas in which I hope we, as a community,
find the way to work more: packaging (or help configuring) web applications or
network services, provide LTS support, and keep on improving
outreach/diversity.

**What are your future plans in Debian, what would you like to work on?**

In the Spanish team area, my plan is to go on translating the website, jump
more often into translating package descriptions too, and help first-time-
contributors to keep themselves involved. In the website and publicity teams,
I hope I manage to put some weekly time to help with pending tasks/bugs, and
serve as liaison with the other areas in which I'm involved (women, l10n,
contributors...). If I become DD, I would like to create/adopt some data
sources for contributors.debian.org, or convince people to do it I'm not sure
if I will be able to attend DebConf some year; meanwhile, at least, I'll
continue trying to help with the blog and promotion (as -publicity-team
member).

**Why should developers and users join Debian community? What makes Debian a great and happy place?**

For using it: the desktop experience has improved very much in the last years,
there's a clear separation between free and non-free software so the Debian
users always know where are we, and there is wide documentation (in English,
at least. Probably in other languages too). For getting involved: I like very
much that you can lurk what almost everybody does: just join some mailing
lists or IRC channels, the Debian people work in the open. So you know a bit
where are you jumping in. Later you learn that everything is easier than what
was looking from the outside, because you make friends and with friends
everything is better.  
Contributions made to Debian have many chances to reach a very wide community:
Debian users, upstream projects, and the hundreds of derivatives. It's a quite
horizontal, decentralized organization (that has its downsides too, but I can
live with them).

**Is there something you would change in FLOSS ecosystem?**

We need much more internationalization and localization efforts. People don't
need English for using libre software nowadays in their desktop, it's one of
our big strenghts, but they definitely need English for using libre software
for Android, or solving problems with the libre software they use in your
computers/devices, or to contribute to any community. I think we need more
local groups for user support/outreach, more libre-software-based translation
tools and online services (replacements for Google Translator, for
Transifex...),and more internationalization and localization efforts (manuals,
websites... not only the software itself). If we work hard in this area, we'll
gain much more users and much more contributors.

**Why does privacy matter to you?**

I have a son, at our family we interchange photos, and sometimes I have
private conversations using the smartphone, mail or other internet services. I
want to have the chance that the day that I (or my family) need privacy, we
can have it easily. And I want that the people that really need privacy today,
have proper tools at their hand. So I try to use PGP, selfhost my multimedia
website, use decentralized, free software based networks and XMPP mobile
apps... to help those projects to thrive. I try do my part of the network
effect!

**You are being upset with rise of Github - why is that and what would change would you like to see?**

I totally agree with Mako's essay ["Free software needs free
tools"](http://mako.cc/writing/hill-free_tools.html). Yes, many nonfree web
services are easier and have better features right now, but the key is that
only dogfooding can change that, the same like changed it with the GNU/Linux
desktop and Open/LibreOffice for example...  
I would like to see more people trying to selfhost, use and promote libre
software based forges, so in addition to avoid vendor lock in and win
consistency in our discourse, we polish the available tools and eventually win
the battle also in the technical side.

**You are hosting yours own instances of Mediagoblin - as it is not officially packaged in Debian yet, how do you manage it and how would you encourage others to do it?**

I followed the MediaGoblin documentation for its last stable release, and
hanged on the IRC channel when in doubts/problems. It was not so hard, because
it's well documented for Debian systems, and most of the dependencies are
already packaged (in stable and testing). MediaGoblin is [in its way to
stretch](https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=657405) too (thanks
simonft and the rest of people working on this!). I'm documenting my
adventures with selfhosting in [my blog](<http://larjona.wordpress.com>), but
I need to write more often, and put more time in my small server (now I try to
selfhost my git projects with cgit, and I want to setup an XMPP server and
Etherpad Lite too).

**You are trying to resolve with self-hosting personal issues with services such as WhatsUp and other non-free parts of our everyday lives- what issues are you hitting on during your way and how do you resolve them?**

"#iloveemail", but people don't love it anymore, it seems... I've researched a
bit about instant messaging to try to propose alternatives to WhatsApp to my
family and friends. It seems [Conversations](https://f-droid.org/repository/br
owse/?fdfilter=Conversations&fdid=eu.siacs.conversations) with a community
XMPP server where to create multi user chat rooms can be a replacement, so my
plan is to try during this year. Meanwhile, I've setup the MediaGoblin site so
I upload the photos there instead of sending them with the phone, and for the
1-to-1 chat I try to move people to
[Kontalk](https://f-droid.org/repository/browse/?fdfilter=Kontalk) (instant
messaging, GPG, photos, voice notes...). For the videocalls, I promote
[Jitsi](https://jitsi.org/) or just point people to
[meet.jit.si](https://meet.jit.si/)/FancyNameofChatRoom. I have account and
[owndrive.com](https://my.owndrive.com) and will try to host Owncloud too.
We'll see what happens.

**You are interested in radio shows - what drives you into that field and will we see soon any podcasts from Laura?**

I like to talk and I'm not a shy person, so the few times that in any of my
social groups there was a chance to "talk in the radio", I volunteered and
enjoyed. This has been, in my life, 6 or 7 times (in Spanish, talking about
social activism or politics. No records, though!). Some months ago the people
of "El Binario" invited me to talk at "findenegro" about pump.io and free
networks (in Spanish), I accepted and had a very nice time ([audios in my
mediagoblin](http://media.larjona.net/u/larjona/tag/redes-libres/)). I wish I
have more free time to listen to podcasts and maybe to join some other people
to participate in a program in a regular basis. OTOH, my son asks for a tale
almost each day... I follow one of Gianni Rodari "The grammar of fantasy"'s
approach: take some day-to-day facts and add something unexpected and crazy,
and tailor a short story. Maybe I could record them and publish in my
MediaGoblin... Of course their literary quality is not even near to Gianni
Rodari's but people that listened to them when I was storytelling (in the
metro, my mother at home, some friends...) say they are fun and interesting.
Who knows!

![Work of Laura's son](../images/son.jpg)
