<!-- 
.. title: Trip to DebConf14
.. slug: trip-to-debconf14
.. date: 2015-02-02 21:08:34 UTC+02:00
.. tags: debconf, family, trip
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

First thing first. I went with Debian invitation letter to US embassy in
Sarajewo, got accepted and after few days my passport with US visa was with
me. Got booked ticket (with help of Steve Langasek) and bought my bus ticket
to Belgrade Airport (Nikola Tesla). As bus tour would be from Banja Luka
through Croatia (the highway) and then to Belgrade I needed some special
planning to do. To be honest I needed some special plan for whole trip. You
wonder why I needed special plan?! Well because I was bringing with me 9
liters of rakija. Yep you read it correctly - 9 liters of rakija. As in most
European countries (and especially EU, which Croatia is now part) allowed
quantity was to bring 1l of it. I wasn't much nervous about it (actually I
wasn't nervous at all I just didn't want to loose the rakija ;) ) as I already
had "bus-border" experience during my previous DebConf (DebConf13 in
Switzerland). So I packed all nine liters into my backpack and put it above
where I sat. In my suitcase (that is going in suitcase space inside bus) I put
my laptop from backpack. The suitcase would most probably be checked by border
police but the backpack shouldn't be.

<!-- TEASER_END -->

On the border between Republic of Srpska
and Croatia my suitcase got checked and I was asked about bringing something
illegal or over the allowed quantity. I naturally said no. On the border
between Croatia and Serbia same story. Same answer. As bus was meant by
schedule to go directly to Belgrade bus station I started planning which bus I
needed to take to get to airport Nikola Tesla, but in meantime I heard people
rumbling about possibility to pay some extra cash they will ride and drop you
at airport directly. So I offered extra cash, driver accepted and I was at
airport without further hassle. Oh sweet corruption. 

As I had some time before
my flight I started to work on my plan for next step. My suitcase will
probably be heavier then 23kg (which is allowed limit) so I needed some master
plan because bringing liquid in your backpack on plane is forbidden. Repacked
rakija into suitcase to obey the law. Okay, first lets measure the weight -
sweet mother of Dennis Ritchie, it was 22.5kg. I was in! (of course my
suitcase is going to be scanned but woohoo). Checking got fine, ticket was
fine, passport was fine and we started boarding - when the speaker called me
to come to the terminal from where police will escort me to the room where
suitcases are scanned because I have suspicious package. I knew what was about
but I wasn't willing to give up. While walking with police officier I asked
him about quantity of rakija I can bring with me. He said 1l. Well I read that
it was allowed 5l (I said I had some extra time on airport so I read their
official guide because I was bored). He denied. We came to the room and there
was old guy that was scanning suitcases - I just asked him the same question.
He answer the magical number 5. Okay, I have 5 but I don't want to give up
additional 4, at least not without trying. I started a story how I am going to
a conference in USA, and there will be many people that do great stuff for
overall humanity and that those people like a drop of good rakija. He looked
up to me and said: " You know what kid, life is only once, fuck it, take it
all, good luck and say hello to those good folks". Awesome. Again. AWESOME! 

I
was soon up in the air, flying to Rome. And there I found out that somebody by
mistake sent my suitcase to Rome instead to New York. That meant it was going
to be checked. I was doomed. The funny part, the suitcase was going on same
line with backpack. I gave up my hope. My backpack was first followed by my
suitcase. Here comes intersting part. My backpack has an special chamber
inside it (I rarely used it) where I forgot that at some point there was a
200ml shower gel (on plane you are allowed to bring 1000ml but in 100ml
packs). So they stopped the line and officier started to search my backpack
(at the time I didn't knew about me having shower gel in backpack). They
couldn't find it. Scanned again, another officier came along and helped.
Nothing. Scanned another time. All lines got offline, all officiers came, most
of them creating circle around me. Okay, I understand what was happening - I
have a messy beard and have some liquid somewhere hidden in my backpack. They
gave me the backpack and asked if I can find the liquid. I started searching
confused about what do I have inside. And then there was the "aha" moment and
I found the shower gel. Now comes the interesting part. Try to imagine - few
offciers around me, one in front of me helding now my bag, one behind the one
in front of me (he was the one who operated scanning on my line) and me with
shower gel in my hand. The officier pushes button for line to come online, the
officier in front of me is explaining that I am not allowed to bring gel with
me and others are laughing relaxed knowing that I didn't bring a bomb. Here is
my chance - I made quick turn to left and handed the gel to officier. Everyone
was taken by surprise and turned their eyes on me. The officier operating the
line didn't move his finger off the button. They got scared for the moment. My
suitcase pass through without anybody taking a look at it. They greeted me
with smile and help me get on time to boarding terminal. Suitcase was sent to
New York. That was fantastic experience. 

Travelling to New York - food,
drinks, movies, games. Arriving to New York marked the beginning of craziest
part of my trip to Portland. My flight was late for more then an hour. I asked
flying hostess if I could get out as first because I needed to catch a flight
to Portland and she notified everyone on plain if they can politely wait for
me to get through. People where nice, I got out and arrived at entry point
where you get your passport checked, customs stamped and fingerprints read -
there were almost 300 of others in front of me and I had 20 minutes to catch
the flight. For a second I gave up but then I got determined to try. I asked
officier if I can get somekind of favor and be put in front of line, showing
to him my ticket for Portland. He helped me to get among first ten and offered
me to get my suitcase for me which I accepted. I knew this was not enough for
me so I asked second officier and he pointed me to checking gate where only US
citizens are allowed - and the officier working on that gate just let me
through. Great! But not that great. After I met with first officier who
brought my suitcase I needed to go through customs which wasn't possible
because I didn't get stamp on that piece of paper (and even at customs there
where about hundred of people that politely let me go first to customs, which
now was a bummer). I was sent back to entrance gate (another US citizens only
gate) while first officier was waiting me at customs with my suitcase.
Checking was quick and guard at customs after that just let me go forward
without checking the suitcase. Wait what??! I got through New York customs
with 9 liters of rakija! The first officier even offered me a favor to take my
suitcase to weight checking and sending it to Portland - I accepted that
because I knew they can't open it without me. Of course they can hold it but I
believed they will send it to Portland (with maybe a notification of its
package). Now I needed to get through personal checkings and find where my
plane is. I was running and asking people where the Portland plain will be and
got to informations where they pointed me into right direction and also
printed me a valid ticket as this one I had was only a proof that I have the
ticket ( I call that luck). I came to checking to find out there are almost
100 people in front of me. Why all this is happening to meeee?! I found flight
hostess for my plane and they suggested that I just ask people in front
politely that they would probably let me go - and they were right. With a bit
of their help I got to checking very quickly. I am not going to explain
checking but after it I was running in untied shoes, holding my jeans in one
hand and belt in other with half-opened backpack (and inside a laptop) on my
back asking people where is my terminal to just find out it was in another
building. Quickly running out and to other building across the street where I
approached a lady officier to ask where is my exact gate (I can't describe her
look, watching young guy with jeans in one hand and belt in other). Fast
forward I came to gate in time (even had time to dress) and there were even
two Debian guys which at time I didn't knew but during DebConf we became great
friends.

After arriving to Portland, Steve Langasek waited for me (thank you!) and we
found out that my suitcase was late from New York so they will deliver it to
my place tomorrow around dinner time. Next day the suitcase really arrived on
said time and when I opened it - there it was. All nine liters of sweet drops.
So if you think you could make a movie out of this - you have my copylefted
permission to do so :D .

* * *

Also I want to thank Devin Theriot-Orr who helped me before coming to US and
to say sorry that I forgot to have a drink with you as I promised (but we will
correct that somehow). :)
